kadāpi janmarkṣadine tava prabho nimantritajñātivadhūmahīsurā |
mahānasastvāṃ savidhe nidhāya sā mahānasādau vavṛte vrajeśvarī ||1||
kadāpi janma-ṛkṣa-dine	once, on the birth star day
tava prabho	of Thee, O Lord!
nimantrita-	having invited
jñāti-vadhū-mahīsurā:	relatives, their wives and Braahmins
mahā-anasa:-tvāṃ savidhe	a big cart, Thee near it
nidhāya sā	placing, she (Yashodaa)
mahāna-sādau	in the kitchen
vavṛte vrajeśvarī	got busy Yashoda
O Lord! Once on Thy birth star day, Yashoda, the queen of Vraja, who had invited the relatives and their wives and the Braahmins, for the occasion, placed Thee near a big cart and got busy in the kitchen organising the feast.
tato bhavattrāṇaniyuktabālakaprabhītisaṅkrandanasaṅkulāravai: |
vimiśramaśrāvi bhavatsamīpata: parisphuṭaddārucaṭaccaṭārava: ||2||
tata: bhavat-	then, for Thy
trāṇa-niyukta-	to protect appointed
bālaka-prabhīti-	the boys
saṅkrandana-	fearfully crying
saṅkulā-ravai:	the confused voices
vimiśram-aśrāvi	which were mingled (with) , were heard
bhavat-samīpata:	from near Thee
parisphuṭat-dāru-	cracking and breaking of wood
caṭat-caṭā-rava:	with the crackling sound
Then from near Thee, was heard the fearful cries and confused voices of various boys who were appointed to protect Thee, which was mingled with the sound of the crackling and breaking sound of wood.
tatastadākarṇanasambhramaśramaprakampivakṣojabharā vrajāṅganā: |
bhavantamantardadṛśussamantato viniṣpataddāruṇadārumadhyagam ||3||
tata:-tat-ākarṇana-	then that hearing
sambhrama-śrama-	(with) the fear and the effort
prakampi-vakṣoja-bharā:	heaving with the heavy breasts
vrajāṅganā:	the Gopikas
bhavantam-anta:-dadṛśu:-	Thee saw amongst
samntata: viniṣpatat-	all around strewn
dāruṇa-dāru-madhyagam	big pieces of wood, in the midst lying
Then hearing the terrific sound, frightened, the Gopikas came running with their heavy breasts heaving because of the effort and anxiety. They saw Thee lying amongst the frightful big pieces of broken wood strewn all around.
śiśoraho kiṃ kimabhūditi drutaṃ pradhāvya nanda: paśupāśca bhūsurā: |
bhavantamālokya yaśodayā dhṛtaṃ samāśvasannaśrujalārdralocanā: ||4||
śiśo:-aho	to the child, Alas!
kiṃ kim-abhūt-	what! What has happened
iti drutaṃ pradhāvya	thus (saying),swiftly running
nanda: paśupā:-ca	Nanda Gopa, the cowherds
bhūsurā: bhavantam-ālokya	and the Braahmins, Thee seeing
yaśodayā dhṛtaṃ	(who was) by Yashoda held
samāśvasan-	felt relieved
aśru-jala-ārdra-locanā:	(with) eyes wet with tears (of joy)
Alas! What! What has happened to the child!' thus crying, Nanda, the Gopas and the assembled Braahmins rushed to the spot. Finding Thee in Yashoda's arms, they felt relieved and shed tears of joy seeing that the child was safe.
kasko nu kautaskuta eṣa vismayo viśaṅkaṭaṃ yacchakaṭaṃ vipāṭitam |
na kāraṇaṃ kiñcidiheti te sthitā: svanāsikādattakarāstvadīkṣakā: ||5||
ka:-ka: nu kauta:-kuta:	what! What, indeed how? Where? (did it happen)
eṣa vismaya: viśaṅkaṭam	this is a wonder, this huge
yat-śakaṭam vipāṭitam	that (this) cart is shattered to pieces
na kāraṇam	no reason
kiñcit-iha-iti	at all is here, thus
te sthitā:	they stood
sva-nāsikā-datta-karā:-	on their noses placing their hands
tvat-īkṣakā:	at Thee looking
What ! What happened and how! This is a wonder! This huge cart is shattered! There seems to be no explanation for this', thus exclaiming, they looked at Thee, awestricken, with their fingers placed on their noses.
kumārakasyāsya payodharārthina: prarodane lolapadāmbujāhatam |
mayā mayā dṛṣṭamano viparyagāditīśa te pālakabālakā jagu: ||6||
kumārakasya-asya	of this child
payodhara-arthina:	of being breast fed desirous
prarodane	while crying
lola-pada-ambuja-	by the movement of the lotus like legs
āhatam	was hit (the cart)
mayā mayā dṛṣṭam-	I saw, I saw
ana: viparyagāt-	the cart overturned
iti-īśa	thus O Lord
te pālaka-bālakā:	the children who were guarding Thee
jagu:	said
O Lord! The children who were guarding Thee, declared 'This child who was desirous of being breast fed, moved his lotus like legs, and hit the cart which overturned. I saw, even I saw.'
bhiyā tadā kiñcidajānatāmidaṃ kumārakāṇāmatidurghaṭaṃ vaca: |
bhavatprabhāvāvidurairitīritaṃ manāgivāśaṅkyata dṛṣṭapūtanai: ||7||
bhiyā tadā	out of fright , then
kiñcit-ajānatām-	anything those who did not know (to them)
idam kumārakāṇām-	the children's
ati-durghaṭam vaca:	(this was) a very improbable statement
bhavat-prabhāva-avidurai:-	Thy prowess' those not knowing
iti-īritaṃ manāk-iva-	this statement, a little bit
aśaṅkyata dṛṣṭa-pūtanai:	was feared (to be true), who had witnessed (the incident of) Pootanaa
Then to the people who knew nothing of Thy prowess, the words of the frightened children were entirely baseless. But to those who knew of even a bit of Thy prowess and had witnessed the incident of Pootanaa, could not reject their statement altogether.
pravālatāmraṃ kimidaṃ padaṃ kṣataṃ sarojaramyau nu karau virojitau|
iti prasarpatkaruṇātaraṅgitāstvadaṅgamāpaspṛśuraṅganājanā: ||8||
pravāla-tāmraṃ	tender leaves like pink
kim-idaṃ padaṃ kṣataṃ	is this (little) foot hurt
saroja-ramyau nu	lotuses like charming indeed
karau virojitau	(these) hands, have (they) been hurt
iti prasarpat-karuṇā-	thus with overflowing sympathy
taraṅgitā:-tvat-aṅgam-	moved by (such concern), Thy body
āpaspṛśu:-aṅganājanā:	stroked gently, the women folk
Pink like tender leaves, these legs, have they been hurt? These hands, charming like the lotuses, have they been injured?' Thus with overflowing sympathy and moved with such concern, the women folk stroked Thy body gently.
aye sutaṃ dehi jagatpate: kṛpātaraṅgapātātparipātamadya me |
iti sma saṅgṛhya pitā tvadaṅgakaṃ muhurmuhu: śliṣyati jātakaṇṭaka: ||9||
aye sutaṃ dehi	O (Yashoda) give (me) my son
jagatpate: kṛpātaraṅga-pātāt-	by the Lord's showers of mercy
paripātam-adya me	(was) saved , today, my son
iti sma saṅgṛhya	thus collecting
pitā tvat-aṅgakam	(Thy) father , Thy body
muhu:-muhu: śliṣyati	again and again embraces
jāta-kaṇṭaka:	with his body full of horripilation
O Yashoda! Give me my son. By the Lord's showers of mercy today my son was saved!' Thus saying and collecting Thee in his arms, Thy father embraced Thee again and again, whose body was full of horripilation.
anonilīna: kila hantumāgata: surārirevaṃ bhavatā vihiṃsita: |
rajo'pi no dṛṣṭamamuṣya tatkathaṃ sa śuddhasattve tvayi līnavān dhruvam ||10||
ana:-nilīna:	as a cart, disguised
kila hantum-āgata:	indeed, to kill, had come
surāri:-evaṃ	the Asura, was thus
bhavatā vihiṃsita:	by Thee was killed
raja:-api na: dṛṣṭam-amuṣya	even a speck of him (of Rajo Guna) was not seen
tat-kathaṃ sa	how can it be that he
śuddha-satve tvayi	who are pure Sattva, in Thee
līnavān dhruvam	merged certainly
The Asura who had come to kill Thee, disguised as a cart, was destroyed by Thee. But even a trace of his body or evil nature (Rajas) was not seen. How can that be? Certainly, he became pure (by coming in contact with Thee) and merged in Thy pure Sattvic Self.
prapūjitaistatra tato dvijātibhirviśeṣato lambhitamaṅgalāśiṣa: |
vrajaṃ nijairbālyarasairvimohayan marutpurādhīśa rujāṃ jahīhi me ||11||
prapūjitai:-tatra	well honoured there
tata: dvijātibhi:-	then by the Braahamins
viśeṣata:	specially
lambhita-maṅgala-āśiṣa:	conferred with auspicious blessings
vrajaṃ	Gokul
nijai:-bālya-rasai:-	with Thy childish sweet ways
vimohayan	captivating (delighting)
marutpurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
rujāṃ jahīhi me	suffering, sheer away, mine
The Braahmins who were invited and were well honoured specially conferred their auspicious blessings on Thee. With Thy captivating childish sweet ways, Thou delighted the whole of Vraja. O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou sheer away my sufferings.